An Operating System (OS) is an interface between a computer user and computer hardware. 
An operating system is a software which performs all the basic tasks like file management, 
memory management, process management, handling input and output, and controlling peripheral devices
 such as disk drives and printers.
 An operating system is software that enables applications to interact with a computer's hardware. 
 The software that contains the core components of the operating system is called the kernel.
The primary purposes of an Operating System are to enable applications (spftwares)
 to interact with a computer's hardware and to manage a system's hardware and software resources.
 Some popular Operating Systems include Linux Operating System, Windows Operating System,
  VMS, OS/400, AIX, z/OS, etc. Today, Operating systems is found almost in every device like
 mobile phones, personal computers, mainframe computers, automobiles, TV, Toys etc.
 Functions of an Operating System
Following are some of important functions of an operating System.

Memory Management
Processor Management
Device Management
File Management
Network Management
Security
Control over system performance
Job accounting
Error detecting aids
Coordination between other software and users
Memory Management
Memory management refers to management of Primary Memory or Main Memory.
 Main memory is a large array of words or bytes where each word or byte has its own address.
 Main memory provides a fast storage that can be accessed directly by the CPU. 
For a program to be executed, it must in the main memory.
An Operating System does the following activities for memory management

Processor Management
In multiprogramming environment, the OS decides which process gets the processor when and for how much time. 
This function is called process scheduling. 
An Operating System does the following activities for processor management
Device Management
An Operating System manages device communication via their respective drivers. 
It does the following activities for device management
File Management
A file system is normally organized into directories for easy navigation and usage.
 These directories may contain files and other directions.
An Operating System does the following activities for file management

Batch Processing Systems − These systems were popular From 1940s to 1950s. 
The users of a batch operating system did not interact with the computer directly. 
Each user prepared his job on an off-line device like punch cards and submited it to the 
computer operator who then batched the similar jobs together to speed up processing and run as a group. 
The programmers left their programs with the operator and the operator then sorted the programs with 
similar requirements into batches. 
In such systems, CPU usage was very low and it was difficult to prioritize jobs over one another.

Multiprogramming Systems − These operating systems emerged from 1950s to 1960s and revolutionalized the 
computer arena. Now a user could load multile programs into memory and each program 
could have specific memory allocated. While one program was waiting for I/O operation, 
CPU was alloted to second program.

Time-Sharing Systems − Such Operating system can be categorized from 1960s to 1970s yearwise. 
Time-sharing or multitasking is a logical extension of multiprogramming. Processor's time which is 
shared among multiple users simultaneously is termed as time-sharing. The operating system used CPU scheduling 
and multiprogramming to provide each user with a small portion of a time. 
Computer systems that were designed primarily as batch systems have been modified to time-sharing systems.

GUI Based Systems − From 1970s to 1980s, GUI based Operating Systems became popular. 
These operating systems were more user friendly. In stead of typing commands, a user could click on graphical icons. 
Microsoft Windows is one of earlier popular GUI based operating system which still dominates the personal 
computer space